## Introduction {.page_break_before}


<div style="text-align: justify">Visual inspection of structures provides valuable information for QC/QA purposes, but its value is proportional to the knowledge and experience of the inspector. Still, visual inspections are limited to the features visible on accessible surfaces. Exploratory investigations (by destructive methods) have been conducted to ensure the internal conditions of structural elements under the assumption that the obtained results represent the conditions of an entire section (or region) in the structure. Then, the need for nondestructive methods arises. Nondestructive methods allow the evaluation of internal conditions without affecting the surface conditions. These methods usually rely on the acoustics and electrical properties of the materials.</div>

<div style="text-align: justify">Ground Penetrating radar (GPR) is a nondestructive method that relies on the dielectric properties of materials and can be used (in civil engineering practices) to locate steel and internal defects in concrete pavements. GPR is an effective tool for subsurface inspection and quality control on engineering construction projects. The survey method is rapid, nondestructive, and noninvasive. Interpretation of GPR data commonly helps to evaluate and measure different properties of a concrete structure.
</div>

<div style="text-align: justify">The data collected from the GPR are usually presented in two different formats, A-scan, and B-scan. Most modern devices can present both formats simultaneously. The A-scan is the raw energy signal received by the antenna shown as a function of time and signal strength (amplitude). The received signal in Figure 1a is an example of an A-scan. The B-scan, also known as radargram, is constructed from the sequence of multiple A-scans related to the antenna's position, as shown in Figure 1b, where the depth is represented on the y-axis, and the survey distance is shown on the x-axis orthogonal to the y-axis. The amplitude of the received signal is often shown as a color-coded intensity plot, often in grey, as shown in Figure 1c. B-scans are usually visually inspected to identify and locate any delamination within the concrete or to locate the reinforcement rebars.</div>

![
**a) Single wave signal (A-scan). b) Collection of signals across a distance along the surface. c) Color intensity plot of (b) (B-scan).**
](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/112973477/191904010-0450a119-488a-4a82-87aa-05a5d74f23d9.png "Wide image"){#fig:wide-image}

<div style="text-align: justify">Usually, the GPR is used to detect delamination defects in the pavements. Delamination defects can be under or over the rebars. It is very difficult to observe the defects which are under the rebars. Here, we analyzed a GPR data set that was prelabelled for three classes containing no defects and delamination over the rebars and under the rebars. Models like decision tree, random forest, regression, and convolutional neural networks were used to predict the classes based on the A-scans. The input of the model was either the raw scans, principal components, or the dominant frequency and amplitude in the FFT domain. </div>