## Exploratory Data Analysis {.page_break_before}

### Preliminary Analysis


<div style="text-align: justify">The dataset consists of 16,384 GPR scans taken at different locations along the bridge. Each scan has a total of 512 points representing a scan time of 12 ns. The scans are categorized into class 1 – no delamination, class 2 – delamination above the top rebar, and class 3 – delamination below the top rebar, representing 8427, 6812, and 1144 scans, respectively, as shown in Table 1. Other properties of the GPR scans are summarized in Table 2. </div>


<div style="text-align: center">**Table 1. Summary of classes/labels of the dataset**</div>
| Classes | Class 1 | Class 2 | Class 3 |
|:-----------------|:-------------:|:-------------:|:-------------:|
| No of scans | 8427 | 6812 | 1144 |
| Meaning of each class | Sound Concrete | Concrete with delamination above top rebar | Concrete with delamination below top rebar |
| Peak amplitude of mean signal | 10121 | 9813 | 9649 |


<div style="text-align: center">**Table 2. Properties of the GPR scans**</div>
| Parameter | Value |
|:-----------------|:-------------:|
| Total number of scans | 16,383 |
| Total Length of scan | 363.3 ft. |
| Interval between subsequent scans | 0.0222 ft. |
| Time duration of each scan | 12 nano seconds |
| Data points per scan | 512 |
| Sample rate (calculated) | 42.67 GHz |


<div style="text-align: justify">The amplitudes of the signals in the dataset were found to have high numerical values. The average amplitude of the whole dataset is around 33,000. So, to make the data more symmetric around the x-axis, the average of the first few nanoseconds of readings was subtracted from the whole dataset, resulting in scans that start with amplitudes close to zero. Figure 2 shows one randomly selected scan from each of the three classes. </div>

![
**Randomly selected signals from each of the three classes**
](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/112973477/198888009-6b6bffa6-3a3a-412d-8b55-2a129d1115b6.png "Tall image"){#fig:tall-image height=2.3in}


<div style="text-align: justify">Based on the reference paper used to obtain the data [1], the B-scan, a visual representation of a combination of individual scans stitched together, showed that the bottom rebar reflection was detected at around 7 ns. Thus, it was decided that the readings after around 8-ns would not be useful for our model, and the remaining 4 ns were removed. Also, it was observed that the initial reflection from the top surface of the concrete is detected around 2 ns, so the first 2 ns were also removed from our data. Sample scans from the resulting signal are shown in Figure 3.</div>


![
**Randomly selected signals from each class, showing only the data points between 2 and 8 ns.**
](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/112973477/198888092-eba56164-5253-424a-b1bf-66a6aad0e06d.png
 "Tall image"){#fig:tall-image height=2.5in}



### Mean Plots
<div style="text-align: justify">To visually distinguish between the three different classes of data, the mean of all scans from each class is plotted in Figure 4. The figure shows that the three means look almost identical, so there is no distinctive feature in the time domain signal that can help assign new signals to any of the three classes. Thus, deeper levels of data analysis are required to identify any distinctive features that can help classify new data.</div>

![
**The mean of all signals for each class.**
](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/112973477/198890014-03682ba5-2c91-4b70-a74a-ad6100371880.png
 "Tall image"){#fig:tall-image height=2.5in}






### Fast Fourier Transform (FFT)

<div style="text-align: justify">Another approach to visualizing sinusoidal time-series datasets is by identifying dominant cyclic patterns. This can be conducted with the Fast-Fourier Transform, a computationally efficient way to calculate the discrete Fourier Transform from a dataset. This algorithm transforms information on the time domain into the frequency domain. </div>

<div style="text-align: justify">The time-series datasets from the three classes (no delamination, delamination above rebar, and delamination below rebar) were all transformed into the frequency domain to identify patterns that could easily differentiate one class from another.  As observed in Figure 5, most of the signal amplitude peaks are observed at a frequency of approximately 0.8 GHz, which is in the standard operating frequency range of GPR antennas for concrete testing. </div>




![
**Amplitude vs Frequency Class 1 with no delamination**
](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/112973477/198796951-76d47c3a-a1fd-4806-930c-1861941641d2.png "Tall image"){#fig:tall-image height=2.5in}

<div style="text-align: justify">In Figure 6, it is observed that in the sections where delamination was identified above the top rebar layer, the amplitude peaks were higher in magnitude than the observed peaks in the areas with non-delaminated sections at similar frequencies. On the other hand, the plot corresponding to the amplitudes of sections identified with delamination below the top rebar later (Figure 7.) displays amplitude peaks with magnitudes lower than in Figure 5 and Figure 6.</div>

![
**Amplitude vs Frequency Class 2 with delamination above the rebar**
](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/112973477/198805626-7db1d0f0-c922-4421-bd7a-98ac69ab4543.png "Tall image"){#fig:tall-image height=2.5in}


![
**Amplitude vs Frequency Class 3 with delamination below the top rebar**
](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/112973477/198806202-022ebb9c-4fc1-48c4-ba29-be7df7647d4f.png "Tall image"){#fig:tall-image height=2.3in}

<div style="text-align: justify">From this data processing approach (FFT), a good differentiation from the three classes (beyond the observed magnitudes in amplitude at approximately 0.8 GHz) cannot be concluded. Furthermore, the maximum amplitude of the FFT data and the frequency corresponding to the maximum amplitude was plotted (Figure 8). It was observed that the maximum amplitude of most of Class 1 and Class 2 was similar. However, some of the FFT spectra in Class 2 had higher amplitude than that of Class 1. Also, some of the FFT spectra in Class 2 had amplitude close to the mean of Class 3. It can be attributed to the labeling of data. </div>


![
**Violin plots representing the variation in maximum FFT amplitude of the three classes.**
](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/112973477/198889209-6eba3151-f991-4375-9624-e01f7215b095.png
 "Tall image"){#fig:tall-image height=2.5in}


<div style="text-align: justify">Similarly, the frequency at maximum amplitude was observed for the FFT spectra in the three classes (Figure 9). The mean frequency at maximum amplitude for class 3 was lower than that of class 2 and class 1. The Violin plot for class 1 and class 2 look similar. However, some of the FFT spectra in class 2 have a frequency at a maximum amplitude lower than that of class 1’s data. </div>

![
**Violin plot representing the variation in frequency at maximum FFT amplitude of the three classes.**
](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/112973477/198889398-21f6da40-2975-4964-b01e-6223ac78a1ce.png
 "Tall image"){#fig:tall-image height=2.5in}


<div style="text-align: justify">It can be easier to separate Class 3 from Class 1 and Class 2 based on the FFT analysis. </div>



### Principal Component Analysis
<div style="text-align: justify">Principal component analysis (PCA) was performed on the dataset to change the basis of the data and improve its interpretability. The number of modes was selected to be 2. The results of the first and second modes of the PCA data of the whole dataset are plotted in Figure 10. Since the number of data points for each class is different, normalizing the number of points might provide a better visual representation of the scattering of data in different classes. So, 1000 random points were selected from each class, and then PCA was performed on this sub-dataset. The results of the two modes of this PCA are shown in Figure 11. </div>

![
**The PCA data for all the datasets.**
](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/112973615/198893083-66b632bb-c221-4a99-9b82-824d0ea6b08f.png "Tall image"){#fig:tall-image height=2.5in}




![
**PCA data of two different 1000 randomly selected points from each class.**
](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/112973477/198889098-bd49b954-add9-4b08-bf6d-740e00b753ae.png "Tall image"){#fig:tall-image height=2.5in}
